We're talking to Paul Needham.
And don't worry about, you know, if you're beating or just ask me to shut you off or something.
I guess where you have worn, to use the cliche, two hats, and I wonder, is there, do you get two perspectives, having been at the Borgin and now being at Sotheby's?
And maybe there's a follow-up question.
Well, I mean, it still is dealing with the same book world from somewhat different angles, but using many of the same processes of thinking about books, but applying them to different purposes towards thinking about acquiring something versus thinking about at least, well, not directly selling it, but presenting it.
More than that, they don't seem radically different.
You were more concerned, I guess, with acquiring and maintaining a collection.
Here, the emphasis is on, I guess, getting books that you can offer to other collectors to sell, I guess.
That does require a leap, I guess, of philosophy in your mind.
Well, yeah, the Morgan Library has traditionally collected over pretty wide areas, but it's certainly true that since getting to Sotheby's, one has to pay serious attention to some degree with really anything, anything within the Books and Manuscripts rubric that has considerable market value.
So it doesn't depend nearly so much on one's personal opinions and reactions as would develop in a library where certain areas simply have a focus, have a greater interest for oneself.
And in the auction world, that would be an indefensible luxury.
There would be no point to it, really.
Did you feel that it was time for a change, say?
I did.
I suppose I did by definition in some way.
Just to see the same world from a different viewpoint did sound quite interesting.
How do you feel about, in fact, the Shoyan, is that how you pronounce it?
Shoyan.
Shoyan, yeah.
Now, are they Americans?
Because there is no biographical description of them.
No, he's a Norwegian collector and a continuing, very
devoted collector, but not of printed materials, rather of essentially medieval manuscript materials.
And so the Incarnibles of Morellas came in as a consequence of collecting the other stuff.
Yes, as a sort of adventure in a related form of book.
And I suppose the bug for that didn't bite nearly as strongly as his bug for medieval manuscripts.
Now, this is a Norwegian collection?
Yeah.
That statement that prefaces the catalog, it's not signed.
Are we to assume that that is his statement?
That is his statement, that's right.
Yeah, and in fact, I mean, although it's very brief, I think it expresses his personality rather strongly.
I've already quoted it.
When Robert Ho saw his great collection,
I mean, it could really be argued that that should have been institutionalized.
But he said, if it hadn't been for other collectors, where would I have found my books?
And Skoyan basically says the same thing.
I would much rather give the next generation of collectors the thrill of the chase, the excitement of the discovery, and it's just a very resonant statement from the host.
How do you feel?
Do you have two minds on this?
They really should be institutionalized.
I think either decision is perfectly defensible, because after all these are
private collections.
And if there weren't, from the collector's point, that freedom of decision to do what he or she wants to do, where would the impetus for collecting them come from in the first place?
There may be some institutions that have an institutional passion for collecting, like the Morgan Library, traditionally, or the Houghton Library.
After all, there are lots of other institutions that don't have that kind of a passion, and it takes some serious interest like that to form any really important collection.
So I think it's to be encouraged, and if the result of that is many collections being dispersed again eventually, I don't think that's in itself a bad thing.
I think it's a bad thing only if important materials become truly lost, that is, end up in hands where they get forgotten to an extent that they can disappear entirely.
But if they go from one person who knows what they are and pays attention to them to another who feels the same way, I don't think they really are lost.
Do you think they're even temporarily unavailable for consultation?
Well, it's not a question of being lost.
in the ornithological books, which were said to be extraordinary and probably better than most institutional collections, if not all, that you would never have another opportunity to get as a collection of this body of material.
And it may be, I'll just throw this out as an example.
I mean, there were, even at the Grosier Club, for instance, a few people who wondered why it
But of course, if Martin had wanted to do that, he would have done it, right?
He lived a long life, and so he had many decades in which he could have made that decision if he wanted to.
I don't think there's any alternative to letting the collector make up his or her own mind.
You don't think there's any?
No, I think any alternative would tend towards killing off collecting at all.
Of course, look at Brinley.
I mean, Brinley decided that the material should be sold.
But he also gave incentives.
So he gave something like $50,000, which was a lot of money.
I don't know what the figure was, more or less.
But he gave $10,000 to Yale.
AAS got some.
New York, I think, public library got some.
Yeah, Thomas Streeter did the same.
Yeah, Streeter followed that example.
...credits towards what you might like to buy at price sale.
Yeah, well that's a very classy gesture.
That was kind of a nice way to do things.
That really is.
I guess there are various... Do you still get excited by that wonderful book?
Is there something emotional that... Compared to what?
Well, I mean, what's the alternative?
I mean, we all do work.
And as I say, it's a job, but you must feel something when you find a book at the Library of Congress.
Tell me that story.
Peter mentioned that you were there just to look at the book, and all of a sudden you said, wait a minute, it looks like Caxton type.
That's a heck of a story.
Well, yeah, I mean, I guess that's about right, yeah.
The little strips were sewn into the book.
And so ordinarily, if you're looking at the book as a book, you have no particular reason to be paying attention to the sewing guards.
And I guess it was almost by chance that after finishing what I wanted to see in the books, I took just another moment or two to look at these to see what they are.
Really for me, because the binding was probably 1530s, about 40 years after Caxton's death, my first thought was that it was printing from that period, which wouldn't be nearly so interesting by all probability.
So it took me a while to get my thinking straight and just try to identify the type.
I guess I found that I could, and then I got much more interested.
Yeah, but then the research that you did, in fact, I brought the book, and I'm going to ask you to describe it as well, but just to find out the organization, I mean, that was involved.
I mean, that must have been an exciting... Yeah, well, sure.
I mean, everything that's printed is printed for a reason, and usually the reason isn't
directly advertised in the book.
So what you want to do is try to figure out what situation occurred in the 15th century in this instance that brought that book into existence.
Sometimes that's a very complicated and rather interesting question.
I'm going to jump, just absolutely jump from there to something else.
At the height of the
just prior to the Garden Sale, following the Doheny Sale, as the Martin Sale was underway, and I had talked to David Redden a couple of times, and he had said then that he felt that we were in the middle of another golden age, a book collecting, a golden age, and I suppose we have two libraries.
I mean, obviously it's not a golden age.
like the one where Mr. Hunter and Mr. Morgan were able to buy extraordinary libraries on block, one after the other, and the prices were... But his point was that I think material that people never thought would be made available again all of a sudden was on the market.
I asked Eddie Wolfe that.
He said, well, he said, could somebody go out and get a set of Shakespeare quarters?
I'm going to know.
He said, we can't even get a full run of poor Richard's Almanacs here at the library company, which they don't have.
He said, to me, a golden age is not only big prices at interest, but accessibility and availability.
And so he made that qualification.
But I just want to know, do you think the 80s were a pretty interesting time, nonetheless, for a book collecting?
I think it was a pretty interesting time.
I'm not sure that it was a golden age.
But I think that compared to, I would.
Yeah, just a little bit.
That's fine.
Yes, please.
I've never seen green mussels before.
They're pretty.
I would have thought that people like Morgan and Huntington at their height were spending what in today's terms would be tens of millions of dollars, rather than millions of dollars annually on books.
And I'm not sure they're collectors today.
Nothing for me, no, that's fine.
I'm not sure there are collectors today who are as ambitious as Huntington and Morgan and Fulcher were.
And it seems to me that maybe if there were a collector too who had that kind of money or were willing to spend that kind of money, you might find that entire collections would become available to them again.
Were you able, and how long were you at the Morgan?
At some point, I might like a little biograph.
Do you have a biograph?
Yes, we do.
Then I won't go through the, I won't ask you to go through the, if Matthew can give me something.
I was there 18 some years, you know.
Did you get a sense of Mr. Morgan as a collector?
The first, the first Mr. Morgan.
Some sense of him as a collector, though I, I mean, I still must say, I don't, I don't feel that I,
that I know Pierpont Morgan very well.
One still is waiting for a really good biography of him, I think.
I think Gene Strauss is working on it.
Yeah, which will be good.
Of course, he was not just a book collector.
Much more of his money, in fact, went into art collecting and book collecting.
Yeah, but he kept the books, didn't he?
He kept the books, or his son made sure that the books were kept.
His son's really a hero in this.
Yeah, I think he is.
Yeah, very unassuming and very public-spirited about the collection, making it available, turning it into a working library.
There are wonderful letters at Harvard.
Do you have a sense of people, of collecting as a
as a passion, as a mania?
Do you have us think about the people who acquire these things?
Are you more concerned?
I think about the books more.
That's a valid answer.
I think the closest comparison for book collectors is collectors of other objects.
I suppose the point about
Book collectors, it's a mystery to people who aren't collectors.
What they don't quite grasp is that it is a love of objects rather than of the idea of reading.
And there's nothing unrespectable about loving objects.
It's just that in most people's minds, that's perfectly fine if it's a print or a painting, but it simply doesn't occur to them
that a book is an artifact, too, made by people and reflecting lots of different people's efforts.
And there are perfectly valid reasons why one wants to own a Shakespeare first folio rather than a set of 37 Penguin paperbacks or Pelican paperbacks.
I really just think it's a failure of imagination on the part of the people who aren't collectors that it's.
Do you collect?
I own a lot of books and buy a lot of books, but it isn't collecting in the sense of any of the people that you've mentioned.
I mean, of course, many books, but yes.
I wouldn't bet anything that you love books that you love.
Oh, yes.
I mean, yeah, I certainly still react strongly to books, but I'm not nearly as inquisitive, except in a few areas of certain kinds of
scholarship, original editions of it.
How did you become, how did you choose a life among books?
And this is not to conflict with your, you know, your recipes.
I'm just curious about your, how you got into this.
I just, I guess I found when I was... I mean, did you think you'd be a teacher at some point?
Yeah, I thought I would be a college university teacher.
Teaching what?
teaching history, and at some point while working on my dissertation, I guess a year I spent, almost two years, I spent in London working on my dissertation, I found that I enjoyed handling the books and the documents and so forth.
I'm sorry, I missed it.
You said in London?
Yeah, much more than
the idea of being a teacher became much less important than the idea of continuing to handle objects, to be able to think about them as objects.
Tell me what happens when you handle a wonderful object.
Well, I suppose it is, although it's not necessarily handling a wonderful object.
It's just that to understand any object, the real thing is...
much more important than a reproduction of it, or a Xerox of it, or a picture of it, or whatever the case may be, that some kinds of knowledge you can only get by studying original objects and can't come by any other channel.
And that's the part that I like.
So did you ever teach, or did you actually go straight into it?
No, still I go on.
In fact, I went to the Morgan Library for a year before coming to the Morgan Library.
half a million dollars for a baseball card I mean all those I don't think there's anything everything is really once it's on the market at all it's a supply and demand situation and you know I don't see any particular reason why it's scandalous if one kind of object
brings a lot of money and yet sounds like an ephemeral piece.
After all, anything which is ephemeral tends to be rare, and particularly tends to be rare in really good condition.
And it's certainly good for the world overall in the long run if people are trying to preserve those objects and preserve them in that condition.
If you spent whatever, $55,000 for Batman, you're presumably going to work rather hard at keeping that
But do you smile a little bit?
It seems just that's the way things work.
Now that you are working with Smith, what is your title now, actually?
Director of the Book of Manuscript.
Do you have a greater sense of the value, and I'm not talking about intrinsic value, but what something is worth now more so than...
Well, at the Morgan I paid a lot of attention to prices, but in more restricted areas.
a lot of following decisions of whether Sotheby's will try to get it for sale or not try to, and so on and so forth.
Going over to the other side, so to speak.
Nothing that's come to my attention.
Did you feel that it was time for a career move?
Yeah, I suppose that was it.
You don't regret it at all?
You don't miss the cloistered life of the scholar?
Well, at the time it didn't seem that terribly cloistered.
I mean, it was fairly busy, too.
I suppose the one thing I... there is a certain feeling of satisfaction in acquiring something permanently for a collection, because then one has the idea of fitting in a piece, or continuing a process of building, and that one really doesn't have in an auction house.
And that's the one, maybe, most specific thing.
But I imagine if you do enjoy coming in contact with artifacts,
that this does give you an opportunity to transcend the small world that you were in down on 36th of Madison.
You might be invited, not invited, but you might be sent to look at a collection that nobody's ever heard of before.
Yes, and that has happened, maybe not in the most legendary sense, but certainly one sees just a wide variety of properties that one wouldn't otherwise.
I suppose it does build up some kind of a sense simply of what survives, where it is.
Many of the odd accidents of survival are sometimes rather minor but still quite interesting pieces.
You realize what a haphazard process it is until the books become marketed objects when you're
setting a value on them and aiming them at a much narrower but knowledgeable audience of other collectors' libraries.
I'd like to talk briefly about the Declaration of Independence, which was sold in June.
Basically, there must be quite a responsibility when something comes in without a provenance, and it's really...
the load is really on your shoulders.
I mean, somebody spent two and a half million or something like that.
And it's really your call, basically, isn't it?
I mean, there were others, but what's going to happen with this item really kind of depends upon your expertise.
And whether it's real or not.
And your judgment as to whether or not it's real.
Yeah, which is a very serious question.
On the other hand, the Declaration was so obviously real.
that there was never a point of it seeming like a problem.
Explain that to me.
How is it so obvious?
I don't know quite how to explain it.
But in that particular case, it really had to be the real thing.
It's just there was no way that that could have been a forgery.
It was almost a forgery, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was in a wonderful condition.
You could see
You could examine the paper in the closest possible way.
You could examine the printing, the printing impressions.
Very often when objects are, when there's a real difficulty in examining forgery, well, I think it's much more often the case with autographed material than with printed material.
And it's often autographed material that's under glass, that's been framed.
And the way so many collectors want a Washington letter, a Lincoln letter, and it's framed up in maybe a picture of Washington and Lincoln beside it.
Well, that's much more, the process then is much more like looking at a plate in a book than like looking at an original object.
There have been cases where things have looked real under glass, and then one takes them out and can examine them closely, and then it becomes...
of the parents that they're forage your voice.
Of course, the question, and I've asked David about this too, and he gave me a quote.
And again, the responsibility of the, let me just turn this tape on the other side.